# Three Turtles Problem with a Twist - Physics Cup '25 Problem 2

<iframe src="../Files/anim1.html" width="650" height="550"></iframe>

The animation above shows the motion of the four birds. 

From the animation, it is obvious that the birds will *not* stay in a tetrahedronal shape. Fortunately, there is a perspective from which the birds will stay in a consistent configuration.

When viewed from the axis, which connects the midpoints of $AC$ and $BD$, the birds are configured in a square. Also, the velocities of the four birds possess a rotational symmetry about this axis – thanks to this, the birds will always remain in a square configuration, as long as the viewer is located on this axis.

<iframe src="../Files/anim2.html" width="650" height="550"></iframe>

It might seem that this problem now simplifies into the well-known problem of three turtles on a plane. However, this is not the case as the birds are not located on the same plane. Moreover, their velocity also has a component parallel to the axis.

Let us denote the distance of bird A from the centroid along the axis as $h$. Due to symmetry, this distance is $-h$ for bird B, $h$ for C and $-h$ for D. 

All birds are at the radius r from the axis, and consecutive birds form an angle $\\frac{\\pi}{2}$ when viewed from the axis.

Consecutive birds, say A and B, are separated by a distance $$| \\vec{AB}| =\\sqrt{(\\sqrt{2}r)^2+(2h)^2}$$ between them. Bird A's velocity can be divided into the component parallel to the axis

$$\\frac{dh}{dt}=-\\frac{| \\vec{AB}|_{\\parallel}}{| \\vec{AB}|}v=-\\frac{2h}{\\sqrt{2r^2+4h^2}}v$$ 

and the velocity in the plane parallel to the symmetry axis is

$$v_{\\perp}=\\frac{| \\vec{AB}|_{\\perp}}{| \\vec{AB}|}v=\\frac{\\sqrt{2}r}{\\sqrt{2r^2+4h^2}}v.$$

The radial velocity is $\\frac{dr}{dt}=-\\frac{v_{\\perp}}{\\sqrt{2}}=-\\frac{r}{\\sqrt{2r^2+4h^2}}v.$

Putting these expressions together, we get $$\\frac{dh}{dr}=\\frac{2h}{r}.$$ 
Knowing that initially $r_0=\\frac{a}{2}$ and $h_0=\\frac{a}{2 \\sqrt{2}}$ where a is the side length of the tetrahedron, we get $$h=\\sqrt{2}r^2.$$

Knowing this is enough to find the distance which the bird flies before the collisions. In a square configuration, the radial velocity of any bird is always equal to its tangential velocity, that is why in a time interval $dt$ the bird will traverse a path $\\sqrt{2(dr)^2+(dh)^2}=\\sqrt{2}\\sqrt{1+2r^2}\,dr$. Hence, the total traversed path is $$\\int_0^{1/2} \\sqrt{2}\\sqrt{1+4r^2}\,dr= \\frac{\\text{arcsinh}(1)+\\sqrt{2}}{2^{\\frac{3}{2}}}\\approx 0.812$$
